Dev tools abstraction (#77)
bevyengine/rfcs: rfcs/77-dev-tools-abstraction.md

```rust
/// Modal dev tools are used by developers to inspect their application in a toggleable way,
/// such as an FPS meter or a fly camera.
/// 
/// Their configuration is stored as a resource (the type that this trait is implemented for),
/// and they can be enabled, disabled and reconfigured at runtime.
/// 
/// The documentation on this struct is reflected, and can be read by toolboxes to provide help text to users.
trait ModalDevTool: Resource + Reflect + FromReflect + Debug {
    /// The name of this tool, as might be supplied by a command line interface.
    fn name() -> &'static str {
        Self::type_name().to_snake_case()
    }

    /// Attempts to create an object of type `Self` from a provided string,
    /// as might be supplied by a command-line style interface.
    fn parse_from_str(string: &str) -> Result<Self, DevToolParseError> {
        Err(DevToolParseError::NotImplemented)
    }

    /// Turns this dev tool on (true) or off (false).
    fn set_enabled(&mut self, enabled: bool);

    /// Is this dev tool currently enabled?
    fn is_enabled(&self) -> bool;

    /// Enables this dev tool.

>     fn enable(&mut self) {
>         self.toggle(true);
>     }
> 
>     /// Disables this dev tool.
>     fn disable(&mut self) {
>         self.toggle(false);
>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    fn enable(&mut self) {
        self.set_enabled(true);
    }

    /// Disables this dev tool.
    fn disable(&mut self) {
        self.set_enabled(false);
    }
```

Reviewer: misunderstood in early comment, now I think its okay

        };

        Ok(DevFlyCamera {
                enabled: true,
                movmeent_speed,
                turn_speed,
            }
        )
    }

    fn set_enabled(&mut self, enabled: bool) {
        self.enabled = enabled;
    }

    fn is_enabled(&self) -> bool {
        self.enabled
    }
}
```

To configure a dev tool at runtime, simply access the resource, and either mutate or overwrite the `ModalDevTools` struct.

### Dev commands

Dev commands modify the world a single time, and can be called with arguments.
To model this, we leverage Bevy's existing `Command` trait, which exists to perform complex one-off modifications to the world.

```rust
/// Dev commands are used by developers to modify the `World` in order to easily debug and test their application.
/// 
/// Dev commands can be called with arguments to specify the exact behavior: if you are creating a toolbox, parse the provided arguments 
/// to construct an instance of the type that implements this type, and then send it as a `Command` to execute it.
/// 
/// The documentation on this struct is reflected, and can be read by toolboxes to provide help text to users.

> trait DevCommand: Command + Reflect + FromReflect + Debug + 'static {

Reviewer 2: Instead of the `DevCommand` trait including a `parse_from_str` method, it would make more sense to require `DevCommand: FromStr`.

    // Use a resource scope to allow us to access both the dev tools registry and the rest of the world at the same time
    world.resource_scope(|(world, dev_tools_registry: Mut<DevToolsRegistry>)|{
        for event in events {
            // This gives us a mutable reference to the underlying resource as a `&mut dyn ModalDevTool`
            let Some(dev_command_metadata) = dev_tools_registry.get_command_by_name(world, event.name) else {
                warn!("No dev tool was found for {}). Did you forget to register it?", event.name);
                continue;
            };

            // Create a concrete instance of our dev command from the supplied string.
            let Ok(command) = dev_command_metadata.parse_from_str(&event.0) else {
                warn!("Could not parse the command from the supplied string");
                continue;
            }

            // Now we can run the command directly on the `World` using `Command::apply`!
            command.apply(world);
        }
    })
}
```

Finally, we want to be able to pass in a user supplied string, parse it into a dev command and then evaluate it on the world.

```rust

> #[derive(Event)]
> struct DevCommandInput(String);

Reviewer 3: This doesn't seem to be used in this example:
```suggestion
```
I do wonder what the motivation behind adding 
```rust
    fn parse_from_str(string: &str) -> Result<Self, DevToolParseError> {
        Err(DevToolParseError::NotImplemented)
    }
```
to the modal dev tool interface is

This pattern is very straightforward with commands, and quite complex to do with one-shot systems, requiring an associated type for the input.

### Why should we store the configuration in resources?

As [Cart pointed out](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/12427#issuecomment-2005328288), using a dedicated collection to store information about the state of various dev tools has several drawbacks:

- unidiomatic: these are currently configured via stand-alone resources, and changing that would require either synchronization or the imposition of this pattern on every tool that could be used as a dev tool
- breaks the granularity of change detection: we can't determine *which* dev tool's config has changed
- accessing information about the current config of a dev tool requires an added layer of indirection, and will simply fail if the dev tool was not registered, even in cases where no toolbox is being used

While this makes our internals more complex, that's a trade-off we're willing to accept.

### Why not use trait queries?

> If we need to access a set of objects, all of which implement the same ttrait, why not simple use [trait queries](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/39).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we need to access a set of objects, all of which implement the same trait, why not simple use [trait queries](https://github.com/bevyengine/rfcs/pull/39).
```

This might be:

- an in-game dev console (like in Quake)
- special developer commands entered into the chat box, commonly with a `/` to denote their non-textual effect
- cheat codes
- a unified set of hotkeys
- game editor widgets

Regardless of the exact interface used, toolboxes have a few shared needs:

- turn on and off various modes
- ensure that the active modes don't interfere with each other
- execute one-time commands (like spawning enemies or setting the player's gold)
- list the various options for the user, ideally with help text

### Toggling modes: `ModalDevTool`

In order to facilitate the creation of toolboxes, Bevy provides the `ModalDevTool` trait.

```rust
/// Modal dev tools are used by developers to inspect their application in a toggleable way,
/// such as an FPS meter or a fly camera.
/// 
/// Their configuration is stored as a resource (the type that this trait is implemented for),
/// and they can be enabled, disabled and reconfigured at runtime.
/// 
/// The documentation on this struct is reflected, and can be read by toolboxes to provide help text to users.

> trait ModalDevTool: Resource + Reflect + FromReflect + FromStr<DevToolParseError> + Debug {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trait ModalDevTool: Resource + Reflect + FromReflect + FromStr<Err=DevToolParseError> + Debug {
```

        };

        let turn_speed: f32 = match parts.iter.next() {
            Some(string) = parse(string)?,
            None => Self::default().turn_speed,
        };

        Ok(DevFlyCamera {
                enabled: true,
                movmeent_speed,
                turn_speed,
            }
        )
    }
}
```

To configure a dev tool at runtime, simply access the resource, and either mutate or overwrite the `ModalDevTools` struct.

### Dev commands

Dev commands modify the world a single time, and can be called with arguments.
To model this, we leverage Bevy's existing `Command` trait, which exists to perform complex one-off modifications to the world.

```rust
/// Dev commands are used by developers to modify the `World` in order to easily debug and test their application.
/// 
/// Dev commands can be called with arguments to specify the exact behavior: if you are creating a toolbox, parse the provided arguments 
/// to construct an instance of the type that implements this type, and then send it as a `Command` to execute it.
/// 
/// The documentation on this struct is reflected, and can be read by toolboxes to provide help text to users.

> trait DevCommand: Command + Reflect + FromReflect + FromStr<Error=DevToolParseError> + Debug + 'static {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trait DevCommand: Command + Reflect + FromReflect + FromStr<Err=DevToolParseError> + Debug + 'static {
```

```rust
struct DevToolMetadata {
   name: String,
   type_info: TypeInfo,
   from_str: StringConstructorFn,
}
```

The tricky bit comes when we get to `StringConstructorFn`: we need to be able to store a function pointer that will take us from a string, and return an object that implements our core traits.

TODO: how can this be done?

The definition for `DevCommandMetadata` is effectively identical to start, but over time we should expect these to diverge: splitting them from the beginning will ease migrations going forward.

### What do the registries for our dev tools look like?

Keeping track of the registered dev tools without storing them all in a dedicated collection is quite challenging!
How can we keep track of it under the hood?

```rust
#[derive(Resource)]
struct DevToolsRegistry {
    /// The stored collection of modal dev tools, tracked in a type-erased way using [`ComponentId`]
    /// 
    /// The key is the `name()` provided by the `ModalDevTool` trait.
    modal_dev_tools: HashMap<String, ToolMetaData>,
    /// The metadata for all registered dev commands.
    /// 
    /// The key is the `name()` provided by the `DevCommand` trait.

>     dev_commands: HashMap<String, DevCommandMetaData> 

Reviewer: For starters, can we unify this two metadatas into a single metadata?

Author: For now, maybe. Down the line, I think their implementations will diverge, so I'd like to keep them separate and eat the code duplication.

Reviewer 4: From my perspective, I like them separated. In my mind this goes well with the comment I made about they being +- equivalent to Resources and Events, so the separation makes them pretty clear

Reviewer: The approach will change depending on what we do, if we have a function parsing both the commands and modals at the same block, I think we might need to unify the metadatas. At the same time, if we choose to have two functions: A command parsing method and a tool parsing method, this can be simplified and we can have two distinct metadatas.
But that will have significant differences in parsing, as we have to know beforehand if we are parsing a tool or a command.

There's no need to add further duplicate API: users building toolboxes are generally sophisticated, and the number of calls should be quite small.

While we can use the [dynamic resource APIs](https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/ecs/world/struct.World.html#method.get_resource_by_id) and trait casting to get references to the list of modal dev tools, we cannot do the same for the dev commands!
While this may seem unintuitive, the reason for this is fairly simple: modal configuration is always present, while the configuration for each dev command is generated when it is sent.
As a result, we can only access its metadata: the arguments it takes, its doc strings and so on.

### Parsing and inserting modal dev tools

One method on `DevToolsRegistry` is worth special attention: `parse_and_insert_tool`.
This tool takes a common pattern, parsing the configuration for a dev tool from a provided string, and provides a user friendly, safe API over it.

```rust
impl DevToolsRegistry {
    /// Parses the given str `s` into a modal dev tool corresponding to its name if possible.
    ///
    /// For a typed equivalent, simply use the `FromStr` trait that this method relies on directly.

>     fn parse_and_insert_tool(&self, world: &mut World, s: &str) -> Result<(), DevToolParseError>{

Reviewer: First: What are we parsing here? I was having a look and ModalDevTool trait doesn't have a metadata at all. If we expect to not only parse commands here, but also tools themselves, we can store in the Metadata some kind of identifier to it: Maybe a enum of some kind?

I Think we need to clarify how are we going to register commands so this can be an easy way forward. 
For example, lets say we store in the metadata an enum 
```rust
enum DevToolType {
   ModalDevTool,
   DevCommand
}
```
Now, something that maybe can be strange: To do everything the way we currently do with strings, we must ensure that all the tools have different names.
And so, we get the tool metadata, with the enum stored, and we can make a command or insert the tool, as simple as possible.

Author: > First: What are we parsing here? I was having a look and ModalDevTool trait doesn't have a metadata at all

This is an omission! Lemme fix that...

        // Parse out the name
        let name = s.clone().split_whitespace.next()?;
        
        // Get the associated `ComponentId`, so we can use it to insert a resource of a dynamic type
        let component_id = self.lookup_tool_component_id(name);
        // Look-up the existing resource to get access to get access to the metadata we need

>         let tool_metadata: &dyn DevTool = self.get_tool_metadata(component_d)?;   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        let tool_metadata: &dyn DevTool = self.get_tool_metadata(component_id)?;   
```

Reviewer: Lets say we return Metadata here, instead of &dyn DevTool. If we go with the enum approach, we can match arms and one or another, depending on the tool type.

they accelerate debugging and testing by allowing common operations to be done at runtime, without having to write and then delete code.
To support a robust ecosystem of dev tools,
`bevy_dev_tools` comes with two core traits: `ModalDevTool` (for tools that can be toggled) and `DevCommand` (for operations with an immediate effect on the game world).
These are registered in the `DevToolsRegistry` via methods on `App`, allowing tool boxes (such as a dev console) to easily identify the available options and interact with them without the need for ad-hoc user glue code.

## Motivation

[`bevy_dev_tools`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/main/crates/bevy_dev_tools) was recently added to Bevy, giving us a home for first-party tools to ease the developer experience.
However, since its inception, it has been plagued by debate over ["what is a dev tool?"](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/12358)
and every **tool** within both Bevy and its ecosystem follows its own ad hoc conventions about [how it might be enabled and configured](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/12368).

> This is frustrating to navigate as an end user: every tool has its own way to configure it, with no rhyme, reason or way to set the same property to the same value across tools.

Author: ```suggestion
This is frustrating to navigate as a Bevy user: every tool has its own way to configure it, with no rhyme, reason or way to set the same property to the same value across tools.
```

- cheat codes
- a unified set of hotkeys
- game editor widgets

Regardless of the exact interface used, toolboxes have a few shared needs:

- turn on and off various modes
- ensure that the active modes don't interfere with each other
- execute one-time commands (like spawning enemies or setting the player's gold)
- list the various options for the user, ideally with help text

### Toggling modes: `ModalDevTool`

In order to facilitate the creation of toolboxes, Bevy provides the `ModalDevTool` trait.

```rust
/// Modal dev tools are used by developers to inspect their application in a toggleable way,
/// such as an FPS meter or a fly camera.
/// 
/// Their configuration is stored as a resource (the type that this trait is implemented for),
/// and they can be enabled, disabled and reconfigured at runtime.
/// 
/// The documentation on this struct is reflected, and can be read by toolboxes to provide help text to users.
trait ModalDevTool: Resource + Reflect + FromReflect + FromStr<Err=DevToolParseError> + Debug {
    /// The name of this tool, as might be supplied by a command line interface.
    fn name() -> &'static str {
        Self::type_name().to_snake_case()

>     }

Reviewer: I don't think we can have this trait as object safe at all, we can't have empty methods here, all them must accept &mut self or &self

Let alone those methods, we can't have FromStr and Debug as bounds because those traits aren't object safe, and I'm not sure if Resource is object safe at all, maybe we are forced to reflect all we can and have a FromStr reflected somehow.

Reviewer: I think impl will be more easy if we have this as object safe, So we might have the name inside metadata and maybe call &self in metadata so we can be object safe?

>     }

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    }
    
    fn short_description() -> Option<&'static str>;
```
Can we add an optional option to get a short text description of the dev tool? This would be very useful for different toolboxes, allowing to display a list of tools with their short descriptions. For example, if you type "tool list" into the console, I would expect such a list. Or, for example, it would allow to create a command palette like in VSCode

    /// The metadata for this modal dev tool.
    fn metadata() -> DevToolMetaData {
        DevToolMetaData {

>             name: self.name(),

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
            name: Self::name(),
```
The current variant will cause a compilation error, it should be Self::name()

            type_id: Self::type_id(),
            type_info: Self::type_info(),
            // A function pointer, based on the std::str::from_str method

>             from_str_fn: <Self as FromStr>::from_str

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
            from_str_fn: <Self as FromStr>::from_str,
            short_description: Self::short_description()
```

        }
    }

    /// Turns this dev tool on (true) or off (false).
    fn set_enabled(&mut self, enabled: bool);

    /// Is this dev tool currently enabled?
    fn is_enabled(&self) -> bool;

    /// Enables this dev tool.
    fn enable(&mut self) {
        self.set_enabled(true);
    }

    /// Disables this dev tool.
    fn disable(&mut self) {
        self.set_enabled(false);
    }

    /// Enables this dev tool if it's disabled, or disables it if it's enabled.
    fn toggle(&mut self){
        if self.is_enabled(){
            self.disable();
        } else {
            self.enable();
        }
    }
}
```

Modal dev tools are registered via `app.init_modal_dev_tool::<D>()` (to use default config based on the `FromWorld` implementation) or via `app.insert_modal_dev_tool(config: D)`.

> This adds them as a resource (just like ), but also registers their `ComponentId` with the central `DevToolsRegistry`, which can be consumed by toolboxes to get a list of the available dev tools.

Author: ```suggestion
This adds them as a resource (just like the familiar `.init_resource` or `insert_resource`), but also registers their `ComponentId` with the central `DevToolsRegistry`, which can be consumed by toolboxes to get a list of the available dev tools.
```

### Dev commands

Dev commands modify the world a single time, and can be called with arguments.
To model this, we leverage Bevy's existing `Command` trait, which exists to perform complex one-off modifications to the world.

```rust
/// Dev commands are used by developers to modify the `World` in order to easily debug and test their application.
/// 
/// Dev commands can be called with arguments to specify the exact behavior: if you are creating a toolbox, parse the provided arguments 
/// to construct an instance of the type that implements this type, and then send it as a `Command` to execute it.
/// 
/// The documentation on this struct is reflected, and can be read by toolboxes to provide help text to users.
trait DevCommand: Command + Reflect + FromReflect + FromStr<Err=DevToolParseError> + Debug + 'static {
    /// The name of this tool, as might be supplied by a command line interface.
    fn name() -> &'static str {
        Self::type_name().to_snake_case()
    }

    /// The metadata for this dev command.
    fn metadata() -> DevCommandMetadata {
        DevCommandMetadata {
            name: self.name(),
            type_id: Self::type_id(),

>             type_info: Self::type_info(),

Reviewer 5: The Self::type_id() and Self::type_info() methods actually require &self as an argument, so cannot be called this way. However, we can get this information via the GetTypeRegistration trait (for example ``` type_info: Self::get_type_registration().type_info() ```) which is automatically implemented via ``` #[derive(Reflect)]```. I suggest to add this trait to the list of parents of ModalDevTool and DevCommand traits

            // A function pointer, based on the std::str::from_str method

>             from_str_fn: <Self as FromStr>::from_str

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
             from_str_fn: |s| {
                Self::from_str(s).map(|c| Box::new(c) as Box<dyn Reflect>)
            }
```

I'm not sure if we can store a typed from_str(&str) -> Self 
I'd suggest storing a lumbda function from this that returns Box<dyn Reflect>

   1. This allows CLI-style toolboxes to more easily populate your struct.

### Building toolboxes

Let's take a look at how this all fits together by attempting to build a Quake-style dev console, much like [`bevy-console`](https://github.com/RichoDemus/bevy-console).
Obviously, this is too big to cover properly in an RFC example, so we're going to hand-wave the user input side of things by showing how you might deal with the parsed events, and simplify output by just logging to `println!`.

Our first task is getting the list of dev tools.

```rust
#[derive(Event)]
struct ListDevTools;

fn list_dev_tools(mut event_reader: EventReader<ListDevTools>, dev_tools_registry: Res<DevToolsRegistry>){
    // Clear the events, and act if at least one is found
    if event_reader.drain().next().is_some() {
        println!("Available modal dev tools:");
        for (_component_id, modal_dev_tool) in dev_tools_registry.iter_modal_dev_tools() {
            println!("{}", modal_dev_tool.type_name());
            println!("{}", modal_dev_tool.docs());

            for field in modal_dev_tools.fields(){
                println!("{}", field.type_name());

>                 println!("{}", field.docs())

Reviewer 5: I feel like this method needs to be added to traits, otherwise where does it come from 
Perhaps this is a plan to add a short description to the tools?

Author: I remember being able to do this with  reflection: we need to figure out how to actually access that information still.

Reviewer 5: I just realised that maybe the RFC doesn't explicitly say this (or I missed it), but it is supposed to provide in near future a mechanism for automatic parsing of tool structures from comman line interface based on reflection?

Reviewer 5: In terms of not just providing the FromStr mechanism, but being able to show the fields, their types, description in the CLI, and then from the standard CLI string atomatically fill in the fields of the tool's structure, bypassing FromStr<T>?

Reviewer 5: > I remember being able to do this with reflection: we need to figure out how to actually access that information still.

This method does exist, oops, sorry for the incorrect question. Although it is not available by default, but only by non-default flag "documentation" in bevy_reflect crate.

Author: Yeah, this was simply pseudo-code: we need to figure out how to actually do this properly still.

            // This gives us access to the metadata needed to inspect the dev command and construct a new one.
            let Some(dev_command_metadata) = dev_tools_registry.get_command_metadata_by_name(world, event.name) else {
                warn!("No dev tool was found for {}). Did you forget to register it?", event.name);
                continue;
            };

            // Create a concrete instance of our dev command from the supplied string.
            let Ok(command) = dev_command_metadata.from_str(&event.0) else {
                warn!("Could not parse the command from the supplied string");
                continue;
            }

            // Now we can run the command directly on the `World` using `Command::apply`!
            command.apply(world);
        }
    })
}
```

While a number of other features could sensibly be added to this API (a `--help` flag, saving and loading config to disk, managing compatibility between dev tools),
this MVP should be sufficient to prove out the viability of the core architecture.

## Implementation strategy

### What metadata do toolboxes need?

We can start simple:

- the type name of the dev tool

> - any doc strings on the dev tool struct

Reviewer 5: It also seems to be suggested to be implemented, but is mentioned in passing in two parts of the text. Would you like to add a doc() method to ModalDevTool and DevCommand? Or is it intended to retrieve documentation via reflection, as mentioned in the comments before traits? I think the doc part is very unclear in rfc

TODO: how can this be done?

The definition for `DevCommandMetadata` is effectively identical to start, but over time we should expect these to diverge: splitting them from the beginning will ease migrations going forward.

### What do the registries for our dev tools look like?

Keeping track of the registered dev tools without storing them all in a dedicated collection is quite challenging!
How can we keep track of it under the hood?

```rust
#[derive(Resource)]
struct DevToolsRegistry {
    /// The stored collection of modal dev tools, tracked in a type-erased way using [`ComponentId`]
    /// 
    /// The key is the `name()` provided by the `ModalDevTool` trait.
    modal_dev_tools: HashMap<String, ToolMetaData>,
    /// The metadata for all registered dev commands.
    /// 
    /// The key is the `name()` provided by the `DevCommand` trait.
    dev_commands: HashMap<String, DevCommandMetaData> 
}
```

There are a few key operations that we will need to perform:

```rust
impl DevToolsRegistry {
    /// Gets a reference to the specified modal dev tool by `ComponentId`.

>     fn get_tool_by_id(world: &World, component_id: ComponentId) -> Option<&dyn ModalDevTool> {

Reviewer: As said above, we can't have this as object safe, but maybe we can have this return dyn Reflect?

  - where they're used for debugging? e.g. bevy_sprite
  - in bevy_dev_tools?
  - in dedicated crates, saving bevy_dev_tools for higher level abstractions?
- should dev tools be embedded in each application or should testing be done through an editor which controls these dev tools?
  - this is one of the [key questions](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy_editor_prototypes/discussions/1) for the bevy_editor efforts

Future possibilities:

1. Over time, we can extend the `ModalDevTool` and `DevCommand` traits with more methods (mandatory and optional), enabling:
   1. Gradual unification of more complex shared configuration (e.g. a `set_font` method).
   2. Serializing and deserializing structs from a `.bsn` file, rather than simple CLI-style strings, allowing toolboxes to build abstractions for persistent config.
2. Add support for a trait-queries-on-resources operation, and stop storing modal dev tools in the `DevToolsRegistry`.
3. A derive macro for `DevCommand`, that aligns with `clap`'s calling conventions.
4. Add specialized types of dev tools, likely each with their own trait to establish conventions and resolve conflicts between them.

>     1. For example, we may want to coordinate between various UI elements or overlays to avoid positioning conflicts, dev tools that change the materials of objects, or camera controllers.

Author: ```suggestion
    1. For example, we may want to coordinate between various UI elements or overlays to avoid positioning conflicts, dev tools that change the materials of objects, or camera controllers. See [Discussion #12589](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/discussions/12589) for some initial exploration.
```

    fn enable(&mut self) {
        self.set_enabled(true);
    }

    /// Disables this dev tool.
    fn disable(&mut self) {
        self.set_enabled(false);
    }

    /// Enables this dev tool if it's disabled, or disables it if it's enabled.
    fn toggle(&mut self){
        if self.is_enabled(){
            self.disable();
        } else {
            self.enable();
        }
    }
}
```

Modal dev tools are registered via `app.init_modal_dev_tool::<D>()` (to use default config based on the `FromWorld` implementation) or via `app.insert_modal_dev_tool(config: D)`.
This adds them as a resource (just like the familiar `.init_resource` or `insert_resource`), but also registers their `ComponentId` with the central `DevToolsRegistry`, which can be consumed by toolboxes to get a list of the available dev tools.

To build your own modal dev tool, simply create a configuration resource, implement the `ModalDevTool` trait, and then register it in the app when the correct feature flag is enabled.

```rust
/// A flying camera controller that lets you disconnect your camera from the player to freely explore the environment.
/// 
/// When this mode is disabled

> #[derive(Resource, Reflect, FromReflect, Debug)]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#[derive(Resource, Reflect, Debug)]
```

#[derive(FromReflect)] is not using now

We also need access to one other critical piece of information: a function pointer that allows us to construct a new value of this type from a string.

As a result our `DevToolMetadata` looks like:

```rust
struct DevToolMetadata {
   name: String,
   type_info: TypeInfo,
   from_str: StringConstructorFn,
}
```

The tricky bit comes when we get to `StringConstructorFn`: we need to be able to store a function pointer that will take us from a string, and return an object that implements our core traits.

TODO: how can this be done?

The definition for `DevCommandMetadata` is effectively identical to start, but over time we should expect these to diverge: splitting them from the beginning will ease migrations going forward.

### What do the registries for our dev tools look like?

Keeping track of the registered dev tools without storing them all in a dedicated collection is quite challenging!
How can we keep track of it under the hood?

```rust
#[derive(Resource)]
struct DevToolsRegistry {
    /// The stored collection of modal dev tools, tracked in a type-erased way using [`ComponentId`]
    /// 
    /// The key is the `name()` provided by the `ModalDevTool` trait.

>     modal_dev_tools: HashMap<String, ToolMetaData>,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    modal_dev_tools: HashMap<String, DevToolMetadata>,
```

    dev_commands: HashMap<String, DevCommandMetaData> 
}
```

There are a few key operations that we will need to perform:

```rust
impl DevToolsRegistry {
    /// Gets a reference to the specified modal dev tool by `ComponentId`.
    fn get_tool_by_id(world: &World, component_id: ComponentId) -> Option<&dyn ModalDevTool> {
        let resource = world.get_resource_by_id(component_id)?;
        resource.downcast_ref()
    }

    /// Gets a mutable reference to the specified modal dev tool by `ComponentId`.
    fn get_tool_mut_by_id(mut world: &mut World, component_id: ComponentId) -> Option<&mut dyn ModalDevTool> {
        let resource = world.get_resource_mut_by_id(component_id)?;
        resource.downcast_mut()
    }

    /// Gets the `DevCommandMetadata` for a given dev tool by name.
    /// 
    /// The supplied name should match the `DevCommand::name()` method.
    fn get_command_metadata(name: &str) -> Option<&DevCommandMetadata> {
        self.dev_commands.get(name)
    }

    /// Gets the `DevToolMetadata` for a given dev tool by name.
    /// 
    /// The supplied name should match the `DevCommand::name()` method.

>     fn get_tool_metadata(name: &str) -> Option<&DevCommandMetadata> {

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    fn get_tool_metadata(name: &str) -> Option<&DevToolMetadata> {
```

# Feature Name: `dev-tools-abstraction`

> ## Summary

Reviewer 7: Thank you for putting this together. I now understand where you all are coming from (for context: [my original comment pushing back against the "dev tool" concept](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/12427#issuecomment-2005328288)).

I see the appeal of a common way to represent commands:

* Single searchable database of commands
* Common data model for command input

That being said, I think this is trying to be _too_ opinionated, and focusing on "dev tool" as a specific thing might be getting in our way:

1. Every "toolbox" will have a different way of interacting with these commands. Command serialization/deserialization is something the "toolbox" should be responsible for. We cannot just throw FromStr on the impl and let each dev tool trait impl choose what format to expect. We should rely on Reflect for this (with optional reflect-driven Serde support), similar to how we handle scene serialization. Leave things like the "command line format" to the "command line toolbox".
2. There is no reasonable way to solve the "Dev tool UI overlap" problem in a generic system. Each "toolbox" will define a different context for displaying and rendering "dev tools". The rendering/UX of a "dev tool" is _fully_ the responsibility of the toolbox, and most "interactive" functionality will be toolbox specific. A "dev-tool" that renders content inside of the Bevy Editor should define itself relative to the Bevy Editor's constraints (which are notably ... currently undefined). I do not think we should make solving this problem generically across toolboxes "future work". Instead it should be a non-goal.

I believe we should be fully focused on (1) a command-style abstraction and (2) queryable/categorized settings configured by commands. We should try very hard to build on what already exists when possible, and build reusable pieces when it isn't.

1. Reflect (with optional reflect-driven Serde) for all serialization
2. Use `Command` for "applying a command to a World" (I acknowledge that this is already part of the proposal)
3. Rely on existing registry tooling instead of building a new one. Some options:
    a. TypeRegistry enumeration of types registered with a specific reflected trait (ex: `DevCommand`)
    b. Make this Component / Query driven instead of Resource driven (ex: use a common DevCommand component)
4. Use Commands for configuring settings (including enabling / disabling features)

I think by shifting focus to these things, we sidestep the "dev tool is a nebulous concept" problem and focus on building the specific functionality we need. This also leaves the door open to other categories of commands / configuration.

For example (not a final design, just illustrating where my head is at):

```rust
// Reflect registry-driven commands

#[derive(Reflect, DevCommand, Debug)]
#[reflect(DevCommand)]
struct SetGold {
    amount: u64,
}

impl Command for SetGold {
    fn apply(self, world: &mut World){
        let mut current_gold = world.resource_mut::<Gold>();
        current_gold.0 = self.amount;
    }
}

app.register_type::<SetGold>()

// later, use the type registry to invoke / enumerate / serialize this command
type_registry.iter_with_data::<ReflectDevCommand>()
```

```rust
// Commands for enabling / disabling the settings of a dev tool

#[derive(Resource, Reflect, DevToolSettings, Debug)]
#[reflect(DevToolSettings)]
struct DevFlyCamera {
    enabled: bool,
    /// How fast the camera travels forwards, backwards, left, right, up and down, in world units.
    movement_speed: Option<f32>,
    /// How fast the camera turns, in radians per second.
    turn_speed: Option<f32>,
}

impl Toggleable for DevFlyCamera {
    fn is_enabled(&self) -> bool {
        self.enabled
    }
    
    fn set_enabled(&mut self, enabled: bool) {
        self.enabled = enabled;
    }
}

app.register_type::<DevFlyCamera>()
// Makes these Dev commands available (these could be put behind a helper function):
app.register_type::<Enable<DevFlyCamera>>()
app.register_type::<Disable<DevFlyCamera>>()
app.register_type::<Toggle<DevFlyCamera>>()
// this DevCommand writes a new value of DevFlyCamera on top of the existing value
app.register_type::<Configure<DevFlyCamera>>()

// later (ex: if you want to enumerate DevToolSettings types in a tool)
type_registry.iter_with_data::<DevToolSettings>()

/// Reusable Enable dev command for toggleable things
#[derive(DevCommand)]
pub struct Enable<T: Toggleable>();

impl<T: Toggleable> Command for Enable<T> {
    // TODO
}
```

Author: I can absolutely work with that! I'll do a clean up pass next week, reframing and simplifying to capture these ideas.

Reviewer 7: Awesome!

Also note that `type_registry.iter_with_data` does not currently exist. You can do something similar with `.iter()` and filtering the results, but we could consider providing that ourselves (and _maybe_  building an index to accelerate, although building that index might be too detrimental to startup times and I'm not sure we need it.

Reviewer 6: Me and @alice-i-cecile noticed during the re-designing of the abstraction to use `TypeRegistry` a few issues:

1. `TypeRegistry` was not built for this. The `TypeRegistry` was designed to store the registration of types, not tools or metadata of them. If we would use this, we are potentially allowing usage of `TypeRegistry` for storing **anything**.
2. Using a dedicated resource (e.g. DevToolsRegistry) is a standard design pattern in the engine. For example, let's take a look at [`DiagnosticStore`](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/5357e15966b7936d1134df44b90f347b0f8e1edb/crates/bevy_diagnostic/src/diagnostic.rs#L295-L299) resource that stores diagnostic information. Similarly, a `DevToolsRegistry` could be used to store and manage tools and commands, while hiding a lot of *magic* that could be intimidating to users.
3. In the `DevToolsRegistry` we would store metadata about a tool or a command, which is accessible by providing its name. While this still *could* be possible with `TypeRegistry` it would be a misuse of the registry, and would create additional overhead.
4. `TypeRegistry` limits our flexibility and extensibility of the abstraction in the future.

The use of `Reflect` instead of `FromStr` is great though!

Reviewer 7: > TypeRegistry was not built for this. The TypeRegistry was designed to store the registration of types, not tools or metadata of them. If we would use this, we are potentially allowing usage of TypeRegistry for storing anything.

Tools and metadata are represented as types, and _whether_ a type is a tool (or command) should be encoded as a Rust Trait. From my perspective these line up perfectly with the TypeRegistry's functionality and purpose.

> In the DevToolsRegistry we would store metadata about a tool or a command, which is accessible by providing its name. While this still could be possible with TypeRegistry it would be a misuse of the registry, and would create additional overhead.

From my perspective the "dev tool name" should be the type name (short name by default with disambiguation possible via the full type path). Again this feels like a great fit (and the right one). I consider the overhead of querying the reflected trait registration for a type to be acceptable for this use case (and _just barely_ more expensive than the `HashMap<String, Data>` that a custom registry would use).  

I think the biggest missing piece is how DevCommands correlate to dev tools / DevToolSettings (which we could just shorten to DevTool if we want). For example: the DevTool trait could have a function that provides this correlation.

> TypeRegistry limits our flexibility and extensibility of the abstraction in the future.

This was intentional. My goal here was to put bounds on this abstraction in a way that prevents it from becoming a new unbounded "framework". I'd like to reconcile the requirements of the "dev tool" space with the rest of Bevy.

Reviewer: I agree here: I don't really see a use for Metadata anymore if we can use the type registry for many things
For example, let's say we have the `Toggleable` trait, and the `ReflectToggleable` type and the 3 new commands: `Toggle<T>`, `Enable<T>` and `Disable<T>`, and the CLI tool as an example of functionality here. 
We can have the CLI tool be just a `HashMap<ToolName, TypeId>` (tool name would probably be of type `String` here). We can just have the CLI tool use the name here and lookup in type registry for the `ReflectToggleable` data. For inserting new tools with CLI, we would use the same approach, but with `ReflectDeserialize` instead. 
And so, this would lessen the uses for metadata. Note that with this approach, the CLI tool for example would have to use serde with deserialize, as we don't really have a way to store the given function to deserialize the tool without some metadata. But with the main commands this RFC proposes: Enable, disable and toggle, this will go alright without metadata.
At the same time, I don't see a way to go without a `ToolBox` resource that will store at least the TypeId and the Tool name.

Reviewer 6: > At the same time, I don't see a way to go without a ToolBox resource that will store at least the TypeIdand the Tool / command name.

That's why I believe we should have a registry. If we would ask every toolbox creator to "make your own storage for tools", we would end up with multiple resources that have the same purpose.

Reviewer: > That's why I believe we should have a registry

Yeah, I believe we at can have a global resource to store what tools the app currently have, and rely more on the app registry for parse and creation of commands

How can we keep track of it under the hood?

```rust
#[derive(Resource)]
struct DevToolsRegistry {
    /// The stored collection of modal dev tools, tracked in a type-erased way using [`ComponentId`]
    /// 
    /// The key is the `name()` provided by the `ModalDevTool` trait.
    modal_dev_tools: HashMap<String, DevToolMetadata>,
    /// The metadata for all registered dev commands.
    /// 
    /// The key is the `name()` provided by the `DevCommand` trait.
    dev_commands: HashMap<String, DevCommandMetaData> 
}
```

There are a few key operations that we will need to perform:

```rust
impl DevToolsRegistry {
    /// Gets a reference to the specified modal dev tool by `ComponentId`.
    fn get_tool_by_id(world: &World, component_id: ComponentId) -> Option<&dyn ModalDevTool> {
        let resource = world.get_resource_by_id(component_id)?;
        resource.downcast_ref()
    }

    /// Gets a mutable reference to the specified modal dev tool by `ComponentId`.
    fn get_tool_mut_by_id(mut world: &mut World, component_id: ComponentId) -> Option<&mut dyn ModalDevTool> {
        let resource = world.get_resource_mut_by_id(component_id)?;
        resource.downcast_mut()

>     }

Reviewer: ```rust
    pub fn get_tool_by_component_id<'w>(&self, cmp: ComponentId, world: &'w World) -> Option<&'w dyn Reflect> {
        let type_id = world.components().get_info(cmp)?.type_id()?;
        let type_registry = world.resource::<AppTypeRegistry>().read();
        type_registry.get(type_id)?.data::<ReflectResource>()?.reflect(world)
    }

    pub fn get_tool_by_component_id_mut<'w>(&self, cmp: ComponentId, world: &'w mut World) -> Option<Mut<'w, dyn Reflect>> {
        let type_id = world.components().get_info(cmp)?.type_id()?;
        let reflect_resource = {
            let type_registry = world.resource::<AppTypeRegistry>().read();
            a.get(type_id)?.data::<ReflectResource>()?.clone()
        };
        reflect_resource.reflect_mut(world)
    }
```
With this approach, we can return a dyn Reflect instead of dyn ModalDevTool while keeping component_id

Reviewer: I don't know for sure the implications of using ComponentId instead of TypeId, this can simplified if we don't need to get the type_id from components first.

    }

    /// Gets a reference to the specified modal dev tool by type name, as supplied by the `ModalDevTool` trait.
    fn get_tool_by_name(&self, world: &World, name: &str) -> Option<&dyn ModalDevTool> {
        let component_id = self.lookup_tool_component_id(name)?;
        DevToolsRegistry::get_by_id(world, component_id)
    }

    /// Gets a mutable reference to the specified modal dev tool by name.
    fn get_tool_mut_by_name(&self, mut world: &mut World, component_id: ComponentId) -> Option<&mut dyn ModalDevTool> {
        let component_id = self.lookup_tool_component_id(name)?;
        DevToolsRegistry::get_mut_by_id(world, component_id)
    }
    
    /// Iterates over the list of registered modal dev tools.
    fn iter_tools(&self, world: &World) -> impl Iterator<Item = (ComponentId, &dyn ModalDevTool)> { 
        self.modal_dev_tools.iter().map(|&id| (id, self.get(world, id)))
    }

    /// Mutably iterates over the list of registered modal dev tools.
    fn iter_tools_mut(&self, mut world: &mut World) -> impl Iterator<Item = (ComponentId, &mut dyn ModalDevTool)> { 
        self.modal_dev_tools.iter_mut().map(|&id| (id, self.get(world, id)))

>     }

Reviewer: A cleanup is probably needed here.

We should probably have the methods match the impl above (see my comment above), only the name and return will change.

    /// Iterates over the list registered dev commands, returning their name and `DevCommandMetadata`.
    fn iter_commands(&self) -> impl Iterator<Item = (&str, `DevCommandMetadata)> {
        self.dev_commands.iter()
    }
}
```

> Once the user has a `dyn ModalDevTool`, they can perform whatever operations they'd like: enabling and disabling it, reading metadata and so on.

Reviewer: Here we're talking about dyn ModalDevTool, but that's not possible, so this section should probably be changed.
